## Tips for Getting the Conversation Started {#tips-for-getting-the-conversation-started}

We all have travelled our own paths discovering the importance of trusting and empowering children to navigate their lives, and the power and effectiveness of ALC model for supporting them in that process. However, that doesn’t mean we’re all good at talking about it.

First of all, not everyone in an ALC needs to master all the tough conversations that come up when grappling with skeptics and critics. Hopefully, each community will have a few people who like to do that and develop the skills to do so, but it is very powerful to have EVERYONE be able to be a spokesperson for the school on some basic level. We’d like to provide a few tips to help you start that pattern.

**Share from Personal Experience:** The most compelling thing you can share is how ALCs have directly impacted you or your child(ren). Take some time to think of the biggest differences that have come from being in (or having your children in) a self-directed learning environment with a powerful, participatory culture. Clarify for yourself why you think they’re important, and why they would not have happened in a traditional setting. Then do the next tip.

**Practice Communicating about ALCs:** Practice having conversation about ALCs -- about your high-impact personal stories, about the educational model, about other people’s stories you’ve heard. If you’re a leading communications person for the school, you should be having these kinds of conversations with new people almost every day. You should have non-lead communication people coming to your events (Open Houses, Parent Interest Nights, etc.) and have them practice sharing their high-impact stories so they’re comfortable talking about those kinds of things when the right moment presents itself.

**Express Your Authentic Enthusiasm:** We have been taught that the things we say are supposed to sound logical and intelligent. In order to sound this way, people often suppress their excitement about what they’re saying. We recommend that you express your excitement! ALCs and the things students do in them are very exciting. It’s okay to let people feel that excitement. (If you have it, that is… Don’t fake it!) People will remember how your communication made them feel more than the details of what you said. They don’t have to agree with you to appreciate your excitement.

As you practice these few tips for communication, you’ll find yourself communicating more and more effectively about ALC.