## Getting to the Heart of the Matter {#getting-to-the-heart-of-the-matter}

Obviously, this is the most important section the Starter Kit. All the other organizing, administration and outreach are in service of creating a magical and powerful experience for the students. Yet, this guide alone may not be able to give you everything you need to do that. An ALC is a deeply human experience of powerful culture creation, and words on paper are not the same as experiencing one.

1.  You should have a first-hand experience of an Agile Learning Center – spend some time at one. If you’ve never experienced a culture where people are passionate, vulnerable, authentic, tell the truth, co-create without a lot of drama, and don’t waste energy in power struggles, you may need to marinate in it to embody it, rather than just “understand” that it’s possible on a theoretical level. It is a truly different place than any school as you’ve known it. It may be surprising how easy it can be to work together.
2.  We highly recommend coming to an Agile Learning Facilitator (ALF) Training. You’ll be able to experience creating this kind of high-functioning culture among a group of peers, practicing working with kids, using the ALC tools as a participant and learner, getting feedback from peers and being able to model people who are truly gifted at jumping deeply into connection and play with kids.
3.  Join our regular ALF calls -- don’t try to do this on your own just from an “instruction manual.” Facilitators from schools across the network support each other in developing their skills, solving problems, and hacking the culture at their school in positive ways. You can share your challenges and your insights and learn from others as they share theirs.

Now, whether you’ve had a chance to follow the recommendations above or not, we’re still going to try to have these words paint some of the picture of being in an Agile Learning Center and provide you with tools to build your own high-functioning culture.

**Warning:** You can’t build a high-functioning culture by selectively borrowing a few things you like or “acting” like an ALC without being willing to challenge your personal social patterns. Some of our tools are quite powerful and switching to using just one or two has rapidly transformed communities who were struggling with some of the problems those tools were designed to solve. But you won’t establish cultural stability if you are inconsistent in your application of ideals. A powerful culture rests on the deep integrity of people knowing they can count on things working -- there are reliable patterns not just used when convenient.